hello everyone welcome to the next
lecture on theory of computation and in
this lecture we will be seeing the
formal definition of NFA or
non-deterministic finite automata and we
will also try to understand what it
means with the help of an example all
right so let's get started okay so here
we have the example of NFA and what is
this NFA it is actually a machine which
accept
the set of all strings that end with
zero and how do we know that if we look
at this we see that on getting zero it
comes to B which is the final State
represented by double circles so we know
that it is a set of all strings that end
with zero that is accepted by this NFA
all right now let us just observe this
NFA and try to figure out what is the
difference from the DFA so if you look
carefully you can see that uh there is a
starting State represented by this Arrow
so a is a starting State just same like
the DFA and a on getting input zero what
happens it could either stay in a itself
or it could go to B there are multiple
next States this was not possible in
DFA and a on getting input one it stays
in a itself and what about B we did not
mention what happens to B when it gets
input zero or one is it wrong or is it
incomplete no it is not wrong in NFA you
can actually leave it like this it is
perfect Ally legal to leave a state like
this without mentioning any anything
that actually means that this state does
not go anywhere all right which was not
legal in DFA but in case of NFA it is
perfectly legal and this is a
complete NFA all right and by looking at
this you can guess that it is very easy
to design her it's very easy to design
her NFA as compared to DFA because in
DFA we have to be very careful about uh
sending the state sending the states to
only one next state and we should also
mention clearly on getting input
whatever inputs they are we should show
what is a transition from each input but
in NFA we find that even if you leave it
like this it is complete so it is very
easy and straightforward to design a NFA
all right now let us try to give the
formal definition so just like DFA NFA
also
is defined using five tles which are Q
Sigma Q
not F and D using these five tles we can
Define
our NFA and what are this let me write
it down just it is almost the same like
DFA Q is the set of all states the set
of all
States
and sigma is the
inputs and Q not is
the start
State or
the initial
State and then f is
the set of fin fin
States final States and
D so we saw that this Q Sigma q and F it
is same like the DFA that we have
already studied and what about d d is a
transition function that Maps Q cross
Sigma
2 what we'll try to find out what this
is I'll leave it blank here we'll try to
find out what does this transition
function D map all right that is what we
are going to find out okay so Q Sigma
qot and F are the same like DFA so I
hope I don't need to explain it again so
let us just try to write down the values
for this for this particular example so
in this particular example what is q q
is a set of all states so what are the
set of all states here the only States
we have are State a and state B so it is
a and
B all right and sigma is the inputs so
what are the inputs we have the inputs
we have are zeros and ones now the
inputs are zero and one and Q not is the
start State or the initial State and how
do we know which is the start State the
state that is pointed by this Arrow
coming from nowhere shows that this is
the start state so the start state is a
which is also known as the initial State
and what is f f is the set of final
States so here we have only one final
state that is B represented by the
double circle now what is D how do we
find out what is D this is what we are
going to find
out okay so when we try to find this out
let us try to do some exercise let us
see let us check for State a state a on
getting input zero where does it go it
goes
to State a
itself and state a on getting input zero
it also goes to State B all right and
let us see when State a gets input one
what happens when State a gets input one
it goes
to State a itself right
and yeah that's it for State a and what
about State B state B on getting input
zero where does it go it does not go
anywhere so we represent it with five
all right and what about State B on
getting input one where does it go it
again goes nowhere so it is again
represented by five so we see
that given a state when it gets a
particular input it can either go to one
state or more than one States so we see
that a on getting input zero it went to
two stat States A and B and a on getting
input one it went to just one state so
there are many possibilities let us try
to figure out how many possibilities are
there suppose for this example A and
B A and B are there and let's see what
are the possibilities that we can get so
let's talk for one state a a on getting
a certain input let's say zero or one
whatever it may be on getting a certain
input it can either go to a right or it
can go to B right or it can go to both A
and B like here it it went to both A and
B right so it can either go to a it can
either go to b or it can go to both a
and b or it can also go nowhere just
like we saw that b was going nowhere
so this a on getting a certain input it
has these four possibilities it could
either go to a b a or five right so
there are four possibilities now let's
take another example let's say let's say
that we have three states suppose we
have three states all right we have
three
states which are a b and
c now in this in this example suppose in
state a we get a particular input so
what are the possibilities to which a
can go a can either go to a itself it
can go to b or it can go to C or it can
go to A and
B right or it can go to a and C or it
could go to B and C or it could go to
all of them A B and
C and or it could not go anywhere it
could go to
Five okay so we see that when there were
three states we had eight possibilities
when we had
three states there were eight
possibilities 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 and what
about this case this was for this
example and in this example how many
states we had we had two states we had
two states and how many possibilities we
had 1 2 3 4 four possibilities so seeing
this pattern can we figure out a formula
for this we see that when there
are two states it has four possibilities
and when there are three states there
are eight possibilities so we can
say that it is 2 ra
to power 2 this is 4 2 ra to^ 3 this is
8 so we can say that this transition
function it Maps Q cross Sigma 2 can you
guess it yes I hope you have guessed it
it is 2 power Q 2 power q that is 2
power the number number of states so
that is what our transition function
maps to in case of DFA it was Q cross
Sigma to Q because every state it leads
to only one next state but in this every
state can lead to multiple next States
and it has two power Q possibilities to
choose from where it can go on getting a
particular
input all right so that was the formal
definitions that we could give to our
NFA it is defined using five tles Q
Sigma Q not F and D where Q Sigma q and
F the same as DFA and the only different
thing is a transition function D which
Maps Q cross Sigma to 2 power Q so I
hope this made the formal definition of
NFA clear to us so in the next lecture
we will be explaining about this
particular example in a more detailed
way which will make make it more clear
to us so thank you for watching and see
you in the next one
[Music]